BACKGROUND
mathematical modeling has been applied to the study and analysis of complex
biological systems for a long time. some processes in biological systems, such as
the gene expression and feedback control in signal transduction networks, involve
a time delay. these systems are represented as delay differential equation 
models. numerical sensitivity analysis of a dde model by the direct method
requires the solutions of model and sensitivity equations with time-delays. the
major effort is the computation of jacobian matrix when computing the solution of
sensitivity equations. the computation of partial derivatives of complex equations
either by the analytic method or by symbolic manipulation is time consuming,
inconvenient, and prone to introduce human errors. to address this problem, an
automatic approach to obtain the derivatives of complex functions efficiently and
accurately is necessary.


RESULTS
we have proposed an efficient algorithm with an adaptive step size control to
compute the solution and dynamic sensitivities of biological systems described by
ordinal differential equations . the adaptive direct-decoupled algorithm is
extended to solve the solution and dynamic sensitivities of time-delay systems
describing by ddes. to save the human effort and avoid the human errors in the
computation of partial derivatives, an automatic differentiation technique is
embedded in the extended algorithm to evaluate the jacobian matrix. the extended
algorithm is implemented and applied to two realistic models with time-delays: the
cardiovascular control system and the tnf-Î± signal transduction
network. the results show that the extended algorithm is a good tool for dynamic
sensitivity analysis on dde models with less user intervention.


CONCLUSIONS
by comparing with direct-coupled methods in theory, the extended algorithm is
efficient, accurate, and easy to use for end users without programming 
