BACKGROUND
biochemical systems with relatively low numbers of components must be simulated
stochastically in order to capture their inherent noise. although there has
recently been considerable work on discrete stochastic solvers, there is still a
need for numerical methods that are both fast and accurate. the bulirsch-stoer
method is an established method for solving ordinary differential equations that
possesses both of these qualities.


RESULTS
in this paper, we present the stochastic bulirsch-stoer method, a new numerical
method for simulating discrete chemical reaction systems, inspired by its
deterministic counterpart. it is able to achieve an excellent efficiency due to
the fact that it is based on an approach with high deterministic order, allowing
for larger stepsizes and leading to fast simulations. we compare it to the euler
τ-leap, as well as two more recent τ-leap methods,
on a number of example problems, and find that as well as being very accurate, our
method is the most robust, in terms of efficiency, of all the methods considered
in this paper. the problems it is most suited for are those with increased
populations that would be too slow to simulate using gillespie’s stochastic
simulation algorithm. for such problems, it is likely to achieve higher weak order
in the moments.


CONCLUSIONS
the stochastic bulirsch-stoer method is a novel stochastic solver that can be used
for fast and accurate simulations. crucially, compared to other similar methods,
it better retains its high accuracy when the timesteps are increased. thus the
stochastic bulirsch-stoer method is both computationally efficient and robust.
these are key properties for any stochastic numerical method, as they must
typically run many thousands of simulations.

stochastic simulationdiscrete stochastic methodsbulirsch-stoerτ-leaphigh-order methods

