BACKGROUND
genome-wide association studies  have provided a large set of genetic loci
influencing the risk for many common diseases. association studies typically
analyze one specific trait in single populations in an isolated fashion without
taking into account the potential phenotypic and genetic correlation between
traits. however, gwa data can be efficiently used to identify overlapping loci
with analogous or contrasting effects on different diseases.


RESULTS
here, we describe a new approach to systematically prioritize and interpret
available gwa data. we focus on the analysis of joint and disjoint genetic
determinants across diseases. using network analysis, we show that variant-based
approaches are superior to locus-based analyses. in addition, we provide a
prioritization of disease loci based on network properties and discuss the roles
of hub loci across several diseases. we demonstrate that, in general, agonistic
associations appear to reflect current disease classifications, and present the
potential use of effect sizes in refining and revising these agonistic signals. we
further identify potential branching points in disease etiologies based on
antagonistic variants and describe plausible small-scale models of the underlying
molecular switches.


CONCLUSIONS
the observation that a surprisingly high fraction  of the snps considered in
our study are associated both agonistically and antagonistically with related as
well as unrelated disorders indicates that the molecular mechanisms influencing
causes and progress of human diseases are in part interrelated. genetic overlaps
between two diseases also suggest the importance of the affected entities in the
specific pathogenic pathways and should be investigated further.

genome-wide association studygenetic overlapshared variant networkdisease comorbidity

