BACKGROUND
this work describes the first genome-wide analysis of the transcriptional
landscape of the pig. a new porcine affymetrix expression array was designed in
order to provide comprehensive coverage of the known pig transcriptome. the new
array was used to generate a genome-wide expression atlas of pig tissues derived
from  <dig> tissue/cell types. these data were subjected to network correlation
analysis and clustering.


RESULTS
the analysis presented here provides a detailed functional clustering of the pig
transcriptome where transcripts are grouped according to their expression pattern,
so one can infer the function of an uncharacterized gene from the company it keeps
and the locations in which it is expressed. we describe the overall
transcriptional signatures present in the tissue atlas, where possible assigning
those signatures to specific cell populations or pathways. in particular, we
discuss the expression signatures associated with the gastrointestinal tract, an
organ that was sampled at  <dig> sites along its length and whose biology in the pig
is similar to human. we identify sets of genes that define specialized cellular
compartments and region-specific digestive functions. finally, we performed a
network analysis of the transcription factors expressed in the gastrointestinal
tract and demonstrate how they sub-divide into functional groups that may control
cellular gastrointestinal development.


CONCLUSIONS
as an important livestock animal with a physiology that is more similar than mouse
to man, we provide a major new resource for understanding gene expression with
respect to the known physiology of mammalian tissues and cells. the data and
analyses are available on the websites http://biogps.org and
http://www.macrophages.com/pig-atlas.

pigporcinesus scrofamicroarraytranscriptometranscription networkpathwaygastrointestinal tract

