BACKGROUND
accurate recognition of regulatory elements in promoters is an essential
prerequisite for understanding the mechanisms of gene regulation at the
level of transcription. composite regulatory elements represent a particular
type of such transcriptional regulatory elements consisting of pairs of
individual dna motifs. in contrast to the present approach, most available
recognition techniques are based purely on statistical evaluation of the
occurrence of single motifs. such methods are limited in application, since
the accuracy of recognition is greatly dependent on the size and quality of
the sequence dataset. methods that exploit available knowledge and have
broad applicability are evidently needed.


RESULTS
we developed a novel method to identify composite regulatory elements in
promoters using a library of known examples. in depth investigation of
regularities encoded in known composite elements allowed us to introduce a
new characteristic measure and to improve the specificity compared with
other methods. tests on an established benchmark and real genomic data show
that our method outperforms other available methods based either on known
examples or statistical evaluations. in addition to better recognition, a
practical advantage of this method is first the ability to detect a high
number of different types of composite elements, and second direct
biological interpretation of the identified results. the program is
available at
http://gnaweb.helmholtz-hzi.de/cgi-bin/mcatch/matrixcatch.pl
and includes an option to extend the provided library by user supplied
data.


CONCLUSIONS
the novel algorithm for the identification of composite regulatory elements
presented in this paper was proved to be superior to existing methods. its
application to tissue specific promoters identified several highly specific
composite elements with relevance to their biological function. this
approach together with other methods will further advance the understanding
of transcriptional regulation of genes.

